So another thing that's really interesting
here is that some of these cultures
are completely incompatible.
And this is where the work around that
these authors have done a decade or
two ago.
Really shine some light
on our approaches here.
So the way this works is that cultures
which are diagonal from each other
are like oil and water.
They don't work well together.
So if your organization has a creative,
entrepreneurial,
kind of do-things-first culture,
this disruptive,
create-adhocracy culture, it's gonna be
really hard for you to succeed down in
this bottom left as a design system
with a control culture, okay?
The reason is because, the creative
culture is about disruption, right?
While the controlling culture is saying,
we know the right way and
we have got it for you.
So these two ideas are just incompatible.
It's like trying to swim upstream.
If you're trying to operate in the control
model and your organization is creative.
So I actually have a fun story I was
doing an interview with a woman who led
the design system for a really large web
based product in the job market space.
And she told me this kind of fun story she
said that when she began there the company
was in startup mode.
So they were up in that top right.
The company was like trying to figure
out what their product would be.
They recognized though,
that the the interfaces in their
product were really inconsistent.
So they felt that the design
system was what was needed
to get them through those inconsistencies,
to get them under control.
So the system they built
was intentionally limiting.
They built something in that bottom left.
So they did this without
any of this knowledge.
They just intuitively thought,
this is what we need.
Their hope was that they were
gonna force the product teams to
use the same components and
felt that those teams
would be able to do everything they
needed with little or no extension.
What it turns out though
that the startup mindset,
that creative culture of the organization
meant they were constantly
pivoting their direction in
search of a product market fit.
So the pivots in the product
were the reason for
the inconsistency in the interfaces.
[LAUGH].
And that was actually valid changes
they were making to try and find a fit.
So when they offered this design
system to the product teams that
was wildly limiting, very inflexible,
basically they just couldn't get
anybody to use the thing, right?
It was like, not gonna happen.
They just built what they
needed outside of the system.
Here's what she told me at
the end of that interview.
I showed her all of this and
she was like, my gosh,
you just explained what happened to me.
And she said, here's what she said.
[COUGH] I wish we would have
recognized the need for
flexibility in the system as a way
of supporting the necessary pivots
the company was taking to
find our place in the market.
That would've built trust with our
subscribers as an enabling tool instead
of a restrictive one, right?
So what she was describing without
actually knowing it was that she should
have been more intentional in
creating this collaborative design
system subculture, right.
She should have been operating in
the top left of this graph and
these two colultures
are actually compatible.
The opposite diagonal is
incompatible as well.
So if your company is competitive right
you're in this do things fast market
culture it's it's gonna be really hard for
your design system program to succeed if
you're trying to do so as a collaborative
do things together kind of culture.
In fact, if you remember the story that I
told you at the beginning of this culture
section, right, about the organization
that we walked away from after working
with them for a year because
of cultural incompatibility.
This is kind of what I was seeking
in my research, was to try and
understand what had happened with us.
And our client in that situation was
definitely in that bottom right.
And we, as a service company,
as kind of led by me with my own sort
of collaborative values influencing us,
we definitely try to take that top
left approach in a lot of our work.
We come alongside teams, right?
We sit in the trenches with them and
we do the work together.
And what we were trying to do was build
a collaborative culture, subculture,
inside of a competitive
organizational culture.
And it felt like oil and water, I mean it
was so hard, it just was not gonna work.
I'm not saying that completely explains
everything in my situation, but
my takeaway is that we have to,
me personally, I have to recognize...
When we're working with more
competitive cultures and
make adjustments to how we work to better
align with what they need from us.
These two cultures are compatible.
And I wonder sometimes now if we had taken
a more control approach in our system
work, if we would have been able to
find a way to kind of work through those
incompatibilities.
This, I think,
would have felt more like we were swimming
with the current instead of against it.
So my big takeaway from this
stuff is that we kind of
have to look up from the work right?
We've got to look around and
understand that all of these forces
really are actually at play.
You can try to fight against this,
but it's really hard.
It's really exhausting.
And oftentimes, it just won't work.
So understand that the cultures and
subcultures in your organization,
your own subculture in a way that
gives it a chance at success, right?
I always get this question.
I think because people [LAUGH] a lot of
times when I share about this cultural
stuff, I get a couple responses.
One is, my gosh, you just showed me why
everything failed, which is great but
like I also want it to be something
people can use to succeed going forward.
And the other thing I get is
that individuals see this and
they immediately know where they wanna be.
And so a lot of times they see I
personally I'm operating here and
my organization is here does that mean I
should quit my job [LAUGH] it's like these
existential conversations
that this kind of brings up.
And a lot of times I think when we see
that we're operating the way we want to
but it doesn't work with the org culture,
then we wanna know, can we make a change?
Can we impact from the bottom up?
Can we impact the culture
of the organization?
I mean, I'm an idealist and
I really want this to be the case.
I want to say, yeah,
you can totally do that.
I will say I've I've heard a few folks
who were sort of high level stage fours
where once they had that opportunity
to kind of be seen by the organization
as an influential leader they get
a seat at the table around culture.
But it's really hard for this to happen
if you're not at a more mature state.
So you kind of have to earn the right,
is what I'm saying.
And that kind of comes back
actually to this diagram.
I said, you'll remember I said that we
experience culture from the top down.
But culture is not created that way.
It's created from the bottom up.
And you probably have seen
organizations trying to
fix their culture by
adding artifacts right?
Man nobody here is getting along, let's
buy a ping pong table, [LAUGH] right?
Let's all go to lunch on Friday, okay,
that's surface level stuff right
that doesn't actually help.
But you do this you build culture
by identifying the commonality
in the underlying assumptions
of the people you have.
And you hone in on those
things as common values as
your shared underlying assumptions.
And when you can find unity there
the other two layers are just a natural
outpouring of those beliefs.
With that kind of cultural alignment,
the things that we say and
the things that we see are simply a
reflection of the things that we believe.
I'll close this section with one simple
idea when that is that your design system
won't make your products more consistent.
Think about it, right?
You and I could take any design system,
no matter how restrictive it is, and
we could build the most wildly
inconsistent things with it.
The hard truth is that people
will make what they want to make,
whether you have a system or not.
And the critical word in this
statement is the word want.
So if consistency or
cohesion is your goal the only sustainable
way to get that is to change what
your subscribers want to do.
You do that with culture,
not with pixels, not with code or
documentation, not with figma,
not with react.
And your design system can be
a catalyst for this kind of change, but
it's not going to do it on its own.
This actually is the unspoken and
deeply challenging mandate
of a design system team.
This actually is your job.
I hope that some of these ideas
will help you do that job
a little bit better when
you get back to the office.